PROJECT 05 — LINUX NETWORK SECURITY INVESTIGATION
SSH Security Configuration

Investigation Area
------------------
Effective SSH authentication configuration was examined to assess
the security posture of the network-reachable SSH service.

Command Used
------------
`sudo sshd -T | grep -E '^(passwordauthentication|pubkeyauthentication|permitrootlogin|kbdinteractiveauthentication)'`

Effective Configuration
-----------------------
permitrootlogin without-password
pubkeyauthentication yes
passwordauthentication yes
kbdinteractiveauthentication no

Assessment
----------
Password authentication is enabled.

This is consistent with the controlled authentication events
observed earlier in the Linux log analysis project, where successful
and failed password-based SSH authentication events were recorded.

Public-key authentication is also enabled.

Root password authentication is not permitted because
permitrootlogin is configured as without-password.

Keyboard-interactive authentication is disabled.

Security Significance
---------------------
The SSH service is network-reachable on TCP port 22 and permits
password authentication.

In a real environment, network-reachable password authentication
should be reviewed carefully because repeated password failures
can be associated with password-guessing or brute-force activity.

The presence of password authentication does not by itself indicate
a vulnerability or malicious activity. Security assessment must
consider the authentication policy, account protections, network
controls, and observed activity together.

No configuration changes were made during this investigation.


Firewall Assessment
-------------------
UFW was checked using:

sudo ufw status verbose

Result:

Status: inactive

UFW is not currently active on the laboratory system.

Security Significance
---------------------
Because UFW is inactive, UFW is not currently providing host-level
network filtering for the system.

This finding should not automatically be interpreted as meaning
that no firewall rules exist, because other Linux firewall mechanisms
may be configured independently of UFW.

The network-reachable SSH service should therefore be assessed
alongside the system's actual packet-filtering configuration.


Underlying Firewall Rules
-------------------------
The active nftables ruleset was checked using:

sudo nft list ruleset

The command returned no rules.

Combined Firewall Assessment
----------------------------
UFW is inactive and no active nftables rules were displayed.

Therefore, no active host-level UFW or nftables filtering policy
was identified during this investigation.

The SSH service remains network-reachable on TCP port 22.

This finding does not establish that the system is directly exposed
to the public Internet. The laboratory VM uses VirtualBox networking,
which provides a separate network boundary.

The finding is therefore classified as a security configuration
observation rather than evidence of malicious activity.
