Project 07 — Linux Security Hardening Lab
AFTER-UPDATE EVIDENCE

Date: 2026-09-16

1. Update Verification

---

The system was updated using:

sudo apt upgrade

The upgrade installed the Linux kernel:

7.0.0-31-generic

The system was rebooted after the upgrade.

Current running kernel:

7.0.0-31-generic

2. Pending Updates After Upgrade

---

Command:

apt list --upgradable

Result:

11 packages remain upgradable.

The remaining packages are associated with updates that were deferred/phased during the upgrade, including:

* dnsmasq-base
* krb5-locales
* libgssapi-krb5-2
* libk5crypto3
* libkrb5-3
* libkrb5support0
* libnetplan1
* netplan-generator
* netplan.io
* power-profiles-daemon
* python3-netplan

3. Kernel Verification

---

Command:

uname -r

Result:

7.0.0-31-generic

The system successfully booted into the newly installed kernel.

4. VirtualBox Guest Additions Verification

---

The VirtualBox Guest Additions modules were checked against the new kernel.

Verified modules:

* vboxguest
* vboxvideo
* vboxsf

The modules reported matching kernel version information for:

7.0.0-31-generic

After reboot, vboxguest successfully loaded:

vboxguest: Successfully loaded version 7.2.4 r170995

VBoxService also started successfully:

VBoxService 7.2.4 r170995

5. VirtualBox Module Build Issue

---

During the kernel upgrade, the VirtualBox Guest Additions build process reported an error while compiling the vboxvideo graphics module against kernel 7.0.0-31-generic.

The reported compilation errors involved VirtualBox graphics/DRM interfaces.

Post-reboot verification showed that a vboxvideo module exists for kernel 7.0.0-31-generic and reports matching kernel version information.

The vboxguest module successfully loaded after reboot.

The system therefore successfully booted and the core VirtualBox Guest Additions integration remained functional.

6. Kernel Module Security Observation

---

The kernel log reported:

vboxguest: loading out-of-tree module taints kernel.

It also reported that the module signature/key verification was not accepted by the kernel:

vboxguest: module verification failed: signature and/or required key missing - tainting kernel

Despite this warning, the module subsequently loaded successfully.

This observation is recorded for investigation rather than treated as a failed kernel update.

7. Verification Conclusion

---

The system successfully completed the kernel update and rebooted into:

7.0.0-31-generic

The new kernel is operational and the core VirtualBox Guest Additions integration is functioning.

11 packages remain upgradable because some updates were deferred/phased.

Further hardening work can continue after recording this post-update state.
