PROJECT 07 — LINUX SECURITY HARDENING LAB

Evidence: Avahi and cups-browsed Hardening
Date: 20 September 2026

1. OBJECTIVE

The objective of this hardening activity was to investigate unnecessary network-facing services, identify their dependencies, evaluate their security exposure, and disable services that were not required for the Ubuntu cybersecurity lab environment.

The primary services investigated were:

* avahi-daemon.service
* avahi-daemon.socket
* cups-browsed.service

Avahi provides mDNS/DNS-SD service discovery and was observed listening on UDP port 5353 and additional dynamic UDP ports. cups-browsed provides automatic discovery and availability of remote CUPS printers.

2. BASELINE

Before hardening, Avahi was active and enabled.

Avahi network listeners included:

0.0.0.0:5353
[::]:5353
Dynamic UDP ports on IPv4 and IPv6

The Avahi service was enabled at system startup.

cups-browsed.service was also active and enabled.

3. DEPENDENCY INVESTIGATION

Initial attempts to stop Avahi resulted in the service restarting.

Reverse dependency investigation showed:

cups-browsed.service
↓
avahi-daemon.service

The Avahi socket also triggered the Avahi service:

avahi-daemon.socket
↓
avahi-daemon.service

The cups-browsed service configuration contained:

Wants=avahi-daemon.service

This explained why stopping Avahi alone did not keep the service stopped.

4. TEMPORARY HARDENING TEST

cups-browsed.service was temporarily stopped:

sudo systemctl stop cups-browsed.service

The service stopped successfully with:

Active: inactive (dead)

Avahi was then stopped together with its activation socket:

sudo systemctl stop avahi-daemon.service avahi-daemon.socket

Both units successfully entered the inactive state.

Network verification showed that the Avahi listeners disappeared.

The following command produced no output:

sudo ss -lunp | grep -E '(:5353\b|avahi-daemon)'

5. FUNCTIONALITY VERIFICATION

After stopping Avahi and cups-browsed, core system functionality was tested.

CUPS remained operational:

cups.service
Active: active (running)

SSH remained available:

0.0.0.0:22
[::]:22

The network interface remained operational:

enp0s3 UP

DNS resolution remained operational through systemd-resolved.

DNS configuration showed:

8.8.8.8
1.1.1.1
192.168.0.1

IP connectivity test:

ping -c 3 1.1.1.1

Result:

3 packets transmitted
3 packets received
0% packet loss

DNS and connectivity test:

ping -c 3 google.com

Result:

3 packets transmitted
3 packets received
0% packet loss

These tests confirmed that stopping Avahi and cups-browsed did not disrupt normal DNS resolution, Internet connectivity, SSH availability, or the CUPS scheduler.

6. PERMANENT HARDENING

After successful temporary testing, the services were permanently disabled.

Commands used:

sudo systemctl disable cups-browsed.service

sudo systemctl disable avahi-daemon.service avahi-daemon.socket

Verification:

systemctl is-enabled cups-browsed.service
Result: disabled

systemctl is-enabled avahi-daemon.service
Result: disabled

systemctl is-enabled avahi-daemon.socket
Result: disabled

7. FINAL VERIFICATION

Final service status:

cups-browsed.service
Loaded: disabled
Active: inactive (dead)

avahi-daemon.service
Loaded: disabled
Active: inactive (dead)

avahi-daemon.socket
Loaded: disabled
Active: inactive (dead)

Final Avahi listener check:

sudo ss -lunp | grep -E '(:5353\b|avahi-daemon)'

Result:

No output.

This confirmed that Avahi was no longer running or listening on UDP 5353 or its dynamic UDP ports.

8. FINAL NETWORK EXPOSURE

Remaining expected listeners included:

SSH:
0.0.0.0:22
[::]:22

CUPS:
127.0.0.1:631
[::1]:631

systemd-resolved:
127.0.0.53:53
127.0.0.54:53

CUPS remained restricted to localhost, while SSH remained intentionally available for remote administration and was previously hardened using public-key authentication.

9. SECURITY ASSESSMENT

The hardening reduced unnecessary network service exposure by disabling Avahi mDNS/DNS-SD service discovery and cups-browsed automatic remote printer discovery.

The change removed Avahi's UDP 5353 and dynamic UDP listeners while preserving essential services including:

* SSH
* DNS resolution
* Network connectivity
* CUPS scheduler

The investigation also demonstrated the importance of understanding systemd dependencies and socket activation before disabling services.

10. CONCLUSION

Avahi and cups-browsed were successfully investigated, tested, and permanently disabled in the laboratory environment.

The hardening reduced unnecessary network exposure while maintaining core system functionality.

This activity demonstrates a security-hardening methodology based on:

Baseline → Investigation → Dependency Analysis → Controlled Change → Verification → Permanent Configuration → Documentation
