Project 07 — Linux Security Hardening Lab
SSH BASELINE EVIDENCE

Date: 2026-09-17

1. SSH Service Architecture

The system uses systemd socket activation for OpenSSH.

The ssh.socket unit is active and listens on:

0.0.0.0:22
[::]:22

The ssh.service unit is triggered by ssh.socket.

The SSH service definition uses:

RuntimeDirectory=sshd
RuntimeDirectoryMode=0755

The /run/sshd directory was created automatically when
ssh.service was started.

2. SSH Configuration Validation

Command:

sudo sshd -t

Result:

No errors were reported.

The SSH configuration passed syntax validation.

3. Effective SSH Configuration

Command:

sudo sshd -T | grep -E '^(port|listenaddress|permitrootlogin|passwordauthentication|pubkeyauthentication|maxauthtries|maxsessions|x11forwarding)'

Result:

port 22
listenaddress [::]:22
listenaddress 0.0.0.0:22
maxauthtries 6
maxsessions 10
permitrootlogin without-password
pubkeyauthentication yes
passwordauthentication yes
x11forwarding yes

4. Security Observations

SSH is listening on all IPv4 and IPv6 interfaces on TCP port 22.

Root password authentication is prohibited because
PermitRootLogin is set to without-password.

However, password authentication is currently enabled for
SSH users.

Public-key authentication is enabled.

Maximum authentication attempts are currently set to 6.

Maximum SSH sessions are currently set to 10.

X11 forwarding is currently enabled.

5. Hardening Opportunities

Potential SSH hardening controls include:

* Confirming functional public-key authentication.
* Disabling password-based SSH authentication after key access
  has been verified.
* Evaluating whether X11 forwarding is required.
* Reviewing authentication-attempt limits.
* Reviewing other SSH security options where appropriate.

No SSH configuration changes were made during this baseline
assessment.

6. Conclusion

The SSH configuration was successfully inspected and validated.

The baseline shows that SSH is protected against root password
authentication, but ordinary password authentication remains
enabled.

Further SSH hardening will be performed only after ensuring that
an alternative authenticated access method is available.

